Build: implementation of `build.commands` (#9150)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/user/build-customization.rst

Read the Docs has a :doc:`well-defined build process <builds>` that works for many projects,
but we offer additional customization to support more uses of our platform.
This page explains how to extend the build process using :term:`user-defined build jobs` to execute custom commands,
and also how to override the build process completely:

`Extend the build process`_
    If you are using Sphinx or Mkdocs and need to execute additional commands.

`Override the build process`_

>     If you want full control over your build or are not using Sphinx or Mkdocs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you want full control over your build. This option supports any tool that generates HTML as part of the build.
```

         - npm ci
         # Install any other extra dependencies to build the docs
         - npm install -g jsdoc

> Override the build process completely

Reviewer: This is going to be hidden under all the examples. I'd argue this is a different page.

-------------------------------------

.. warning::

   This feature is in a *beta phase* and could suffer incompatible changes or even removed completely in the near feature.
   It does not yet support some of the Read the Docs' integrations like the :term:`flyout menu`, search and ads.
   However, integrating all of them is part of the plan.
   Use it under your own responsibility.

> When :ref:`extending the build process <build-customization:extend the build process>` is not enough for a particular use case,
> all the default commands can be overwritten to execute only the commands defined by the project on its config file.
> This can be achieve by using :ref:`config-file/v2:build.commands` key as shown in the following example building a `Pelican <https://blog.getpelican.com/>`_ site:

Reviewer 2: I feel like real-life examples of *why* you might use this feature are really helpful in explaining this feature. I do like the Pelican example for that.

That is, "if you need more control" only vaguely describes why a user might use this feature. We might want to be more clear that it's "if your project uses a different documentation tool".

But just to clarify and reduce for now:

```suggestion
If your project requires more control of the build process,
all the commands executed during builds can be overridden using the :ref:`config-file/v2:build.commands` configuration file key.

For example, if your project uses `Pelican <https://blog.getpelican.com/>`_ instead of Sphinx for it's documentation, your project could use the following configuration file:
```

Author: I liked the suggestion.

I changed it a little bit to mention "full control" (instead of "more control") and also to keep the link to the previous section. This will be useful when users arrives at this section directly without knowing that there is something simpler to execute custom commands.

> .. code:: yaml

Reviewer: I feel like we want a minimal example here as well. Perhaps the `echo` example in the PR description, so people understand how it works without knowing pelican.

Reviewer 2: I actually like the Pelican example, but perhaps we could use a more common documentation tool. What I like about this example is it relates the usage to the user -- use `build.commands` if you are using a documentation tool we don't support.

Reviewer: Yea, the Pelican example is great. But I think we want something in addition, because otherwise it requires knowing what the pelican command means.

Author: I don't have a strong preference for the tooling used here, but I'd like to make it clear in the example _the output folder_. If we hide everything in a `conf.py` file or `pelicanconf.py` with the required settings will be hard to understand what's expected/required from the user.

Author: If you have any suggestions that work better than the current one, I'll update the example.

> .. code:: yaml

Reviewer 2: Also:

```suggestion
.. code:: yaml
    :caption: .readthedocs.yaml
```

   version: 2
   build:
     os: "ubuntu-22.04"
     tools:
       python: "3.10"
     commands:
       - pip install pelican[markdown]
       - pelican --settings docs/pelicanconf.py --output output/ docs/

As Read the Docs does not have control over the build process,

> you are responsible to run all the commands required to install the requirements and build the documentation properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you are responsible for running all the commands required to install requirements and build the documentation properly.
```

> Once the build process finishes, the ``output/`` folder will be hosted.

Reviewer: This should be much more obvious in this page. This feels hidden currently. Preferably in bold, and under a heading showing you should _definitely_ read it.

Reviewer 2: It does feel like we're missing some of the requirements here. I feel like we need a list of things. It would help to define the current working directory (repo checkout path), the output path that is synced (`output/`), and might be worth mentioning that `asdf` is used underneath everything too (you probably need to `asdf reshim`)

Author: @agjohnson 
> and might be worth mentioning that asdf is used underneath everything too (you probably need to asdf reshim)

It felt weird to me to mention an implementation detail as part of the "usage of our platform". What happens if we stop using `asdf` in the future, or change it for a different tool?

@ericholscher mentioned about avoid adding magic and calling `asdf reshim` after each command and I tend to agree there but...

>> We could execute asdf reshim python after each of the build.commands, for now as well
> This seems like something we should avoid. The whole goal here is to remove magic, so let's not add it back in.

However, as a user, I'd expect that calling `pip install pelican` will immediately make `pelican` executable available in the PATH. Why users will need to know about `asdf` to make usage of `pelican`? Also, note that this is currently a limitation of `asdf` and `python` but it does not happen with `nodejs`. If you do `npm install -g something` that `something` is available in the PATH immediately.

You may think, "Yes, you are adding `-g` to the command to install it globally". However, the global option works differently on `asdf` than on regular `npm` because the command is run as an unprivileged user, and not installed under a global folder. `asdf` is doing some magic underneath to make this work.

I noted in the notes/decisions that `asdf` executes post hooks on particular command names, and `asdf reshim` was automatically executed when `pip` was called. I linked the issue and PR in the PR's description.

That said, I'd like to find a solution that does not involve users knowing anything about `asdf` because that's an implementation detail that they shouldn't care about.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I agree with that, I don't think it serves us well to surface `asdf` internals too much.

> This seems like something we should avoid. The whole goal here is to remove magic, so let's not add it back in.

I feel like we do need to define "magic" that we don't want, as pushing towards "no magic" isn't necessarily what we want. The flavor of magic we don't want is where we assume we know what a user meant to do and do it for them.

In this case, it's probably safe to say the user meant to have the binary available after installing the package, there isn't really another option.

But, I'd agree that a post pip install hook makes the most sense. Executing reshim liberally, after each command, might make it easier to give user some unwanted side effects.

Author: `pyenv`, which is used by `asdf` to compile Python versions, is already calling `pyenv-reshim` when it detects `install` or `uninstall` in the command executed: https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv/blob/master/pyenv.d/exec/pip-rehash/pip#L26

(note they have the same for `conda`, `pip` and `easy_install` in the same directory https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv/tree/master/pyenv.d/exec/pip-rehash)

----

`asdf` implemented the pre/post hooks but they had to revert them because it introduced other problems due to the change to not use `exec` anymore: https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf/issues/475

However, the `asdf-python` plugin has a PR open to wrap the pip command to reshim automatically as `asdf-nodejs` does. This is why it does work for nodejs' `npm` but it does not work for `pip` currently.

We want that PR merged, which will solve our problem. I'll follow up there with them.

Author: I went ahead and implemented option 2) for now. The example from `test-builds` without calling `asdf reshim` manually by the user now works out of the box 🎉 

Let me know if you want to change directions here and we can continue talking about this to find the best path at this point.

Reviewer 2: I like option 2 as well :+1:

         - npm ci
         # Install any other extra dependencies to build the docs
         - npm install -g jsdoc

Override the build process
--------------------------

.. warning::

   This feature is in a *beta phase* and could suffer incompatible changes or even removed completely in the near feature.
   It does not yet support some of the Read the Docs' features like the :term:`flyout menu`, search and ads.
   However, we do plan to support these features in the future.
   Use this feature at your own risk.

If your project requires full control of the build process,
and :ref:`extending the build process <build-customization:extend the build process>` is not enough,
all the commands executed during builds can be overridden using the :ref:`config-file/v2:build.commands` configuration file key.

> For example, if your project uses `Pelican <https://blog.getpelican.com/>`_ instead of Sphinx for it's documentation,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if your project uses `Pelican <https://blog.getpelican.com/>`_ instead of Sphinx for its documentation,
```

         - npm install -g jsdoc

Override the build process
--------------------------

.. warning::

   This feature is in a *beta phase* and could suffer incompatible changes or even removed completely in the near feature.
   It does not yet support some of the Read the Docs' features like the :term:`flyout menu`, search and ads.
   However, we do plan to support these features in the future.

>    Use this under your own risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Use this feature at your own risk.
```
